# Session management

## Introduction

The following document outlines the specifications for the sessions management of the Standard Notes syncing server system.

## Overview

The proposed sessions management system will be part of the `004` release, which includes the new API version `20200115` on the server side.

Any account version can use this new API version. That includes `001`, `002`, `003` and the upcoming `004` version. Because the newest client will support these accounts, and the API version will still be hardcoded to `20200115`. But only those who upgrade their account version to `004` will be able to use this new session management feature.

The following message will be shown to them once the account upgrade succeeds: 

`Your session with the server has been upgraded to the latest version. You will need to re-enter your account password on your other devices to continue syncing.`

---

The [SNJS library](https://github.com/standardnotes/snjs/blob/64e4e65c7660b9758e7b59547223cd4deb808c56/lib/services/api/api_service.js#L14) will be updated to use the new API version.

## Models

### Session

| Field          | Type      | Description                                       |
|----------------|-----------|---------------------------------------------------|
| uuid           | string    | Unique identifier of the session                  |
| user_uuid      | string    | Unique identifier of the user                     |
| user_agent     | string    | The user agent used to create the session         |
| api_version    | string    | The server API version used to create the session |
| access_token   | string    | The access token used to authenticate requests    |
| refresh_token  | string    | The refresh token used to extend tokens           |
| expire_at      | datetime  | The expiration time of the session                |
| created_at     | datetime  | Date and time of creation of the session          |
| updated_at     | datetime  | Last updated date and time of the session         |

- Each `session` includes the API version they were created with. This way we can deny sessions for a given API version if we detect a vulnerability with that version in the future
- `access_token` and `refresh_token` tokens are both generated using [`ActiveRecord::SecureToken`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/SecureToken/ClassMethods.html#method-i-has_secure_token)
- Sessions are created in the following cases:
  - When a user signs in
  - When a user registers a new account

#### Valid values for `api_version`:
- _20200115_

---

### Authenticated requests

The `Authorization` request header field is used by clients to make authenticated request. `Bearer` is the only authentication scheme allowed.

The client must send the `access` token generated by the session, in the `Authorization` header. For example:

```
GET /sessions HTTP/1.1
Host: sync.standardnotes.org
Authorization: Bearer <access token>
```

---

Below is a list of endpoints that will be available to manage sessions:

| Method    | URL                      | Params              | Description                                            | Successful response code |
|-----------|--------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
|`POST`     | /auth/sign_out           | *None*              | Terminates the current session                         | `204`                    |
|`DELETE`   | /session                 | **uuid**            | Terminates the specified session by UUID               | `204`                    |
|`DELETE`   | /sessions                | *None*              | Terminates all sessions, except the current one        | `204`                    |
|`GET`      | /sessions                | *None*              | Lists all sessions active sessions                     | `200`                    |
|`POST`     | /session/token/refresh   | **refresh_token**   | Obtains new pair of `access_token` and `refresh_token` | `200`                    |

A successful request to `GET /sessions` returns the following JSON response:

```json
{
  "sessions": [
    {
      "uuid": "xxxxxxxx-xxxx-Mxxx-Nxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx",
      "user_agent": "<product> / <product-version> <comment>",
      "api_version": "xxxxyyzz",
      "current": "<boolean>",
      "created_at": "2020-01-01T00:00:00.000Z"
    }
    ...
  ]
}
```

#### Obtaining tokens

Tokens can be obtained every time the user performs the following actions:

1. When a user signs in
1. When a user registers an account
1. When the tokens are refreshed

#### Refreshing tokens

When an expired `access_token` is provided in the `Authorization` HTTP header, the following JSON response is returned:

HTTP Status Code: `401 Unauthorized`

```json
{
  "error": {
    "tag": "expired-access-token",
    "message": "The provided access token has expired."
  }
}
```

To continue accessing resources, the `access_token` must be refreshed. That is, the current `access_token` is replaced with a new one with an extended expiration date.

To refresh an `access_token`, a valid `refresh_token` is needed. This `refresh_token` must meet the following requirements:

  - It should belong to the session of the `access_token`
  - It should not be expired

Since the `refresh_token` is of single-use, a new `refresh_token` is obtained when the `access_token` is refreshed.

Refreshing tokens is a process that is transparent to the user, meaning that the client will perform the requests to keep valid tokens without user intervention.

Here's how to refresh tokens:

1. Send a `POST` request to `/session/token/refresh`. The body should contain a JSON paylaod with the `refresh_token`:
    ```
    POST /session/token/refresh HTTP/1.1
    Host: sync.standardnotes.org
    Authorization: Bearer <access token>

    { 
      "refresh_token": "R_xxxxxxx-xxxx-Mxxx-Nxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx" 
    }
    ```

1. The `refresh_token` is validated on the server. Depending of the circumstances, there should be two outcomes:
    1. The provided `refresh_token` is valid. If so, a new pair of tokens is generated and the following JSON response is returned:
        ```json
        {
          "access_token": {
            "value": "A_xxxxxxx-xxxx-Mxxx-Nxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx",
            "expiration": "2020-03-01T00:00:00.000Z"
          },
          "refresh_token": {
            "value": "R_xxxxxxx-xxxx-Mxxx-Nxxx-xxxxxxxxxxxx",
            "expiration": "2021-01-01T00:00:00.000Z"
          }
        }
        ```
    1. The provided `refresh_token` is invalid. If so, the following JSON response is returned:

        HTTP Status Code: `401 Unauthorized`
        ```json
        {
          "error": {
            "tag": "expired-refresh-token",
            "message": "The provided refresh token has expired."
          }
        }
        ```
        User must start a new session by re-entering their credentials.

### Expiration

#### Sessions

Sessions should be terminated after a period of inactivity. This is for best security practices.

`Long-lived sessions` are a good choice for our use case, because it can build a better user experience than expiring sessions for a short idle-timeout.

- A `session` that remains inactive for `1 year` will be terminated, along with all `tokens`

#### Tokens

| Name      | Type        | Expiration    |
|-----------|-------------|---------------|
| `access`  | Short-lived | `60 days`     |
| `refresh` | Long-lived  | `1 year`      |

- A `refresh` token is of single-use, while an `access` token can be used as long as it is not expired

---

## Security concerns

The following is a list of several threats and their corresponding mitigations for the proposed sessions system:

#### Token disclosure
*A token may be disclosed to unauthorized users*

Mitigation(s):
  - Clients must store tokens safely
  - Clients must use HTTPS when making request with the tokens

#### Token theft
*An attacker may steal a token from the user's device and/or browser*

Mitigation(s):
  - Tokens may be stolen in some way. Users have the ability to revoke any stolen tokens if necessary

### Token Storage
- **Web**: by default, `localStorage` is used on the `web` application.

- **Desktop**: SNJS storage will be used. It leverages the system keychain through Electron.

- **Mobile**: On this platform, the [react-native-keychain](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-native-keychain) library is used.

---

## F.A.Q

- ### What advantages does the use of a `refresh_token` bring?

  The sole purpose of the `refresh_token` is to extend a user session. This is done by generating new tokens, and invalidating the current ones. 
  
  Also, it limits the use of user credentials by not requiring them to obtain a new `access_token`. This brings greater user experience than having to re-enter credentials every time the `access_token` is expired.

- ### Why not use an `access_token` with a long expiration time?

  This is a major security risk. An attacker could potentially gain access to the `access_token` and abuse the user's account until the token is expired.

## Terminology

- **JWT**: A JSON Web Token is a compact, URL-safe means of representing
   claims to be transferred between two parties.
- **Access token**: Used to access protected resources.
- **Refresh token**: Used to obtain new access tokens.
- **API version**: The version of the API in use.
- **Account version**: The version of the SF specification used when creating this user's account. This value is updated when a user changes their password or updates their security version.

## References

- [The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749)
- [OAuth 2.0 Threat Model and Security Considerations](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6819)
- [JSON Web Token (JWT)](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519)
- [Safely Storing Credentials](https://api.slack.com/docs/oauth-safety)